1 The only known manuscript of Lincoln's famous Second Inaugural Address, this document appears
to be a fair copy, rather than a composition draft. Its large lettering and well-spaced lines suggest
it was copied out fair as a reading copy. This is confirmed by the revision he made to the address's
ending, which could have been effected by inserting additional words between the lines. Instead, he
made the revision by pasting a slip of paper, or tab, over the last two lines of his text and writing the
revised version on the tab.
At some point it was decided to make printed copies available to the press. The name written in
pencil in the top margin of the first page of the manuscript, “Flynn,” is almost certainly that of the
typesetter assigned by the printer to set the manuscript into type. After proofreading the galleys
of what would become a three-page printed handout for the press, Lincoln seems to have retained
a set of uncorrected galleys and fashioned this into his reading copy. He did this by cutting the
printed galleys up into smaller segments (mostly consisting of one sentence), arranging them into
two columns, and pasting them onto a larger sheet. The text of this reading copy shows two verbal
changes, which are present also in the manuscript copy, and many punctuation changes, which are
not. This is presumably the text that Lincoln read from at the inaugural ceremony at the Capitol on
March 4, 1865.
For more details on the manuscript, the three-page printed press handout, and the reading copy,
see David C. Mearns and Lloyd A. Dunlap, Library of Congress Press Release, Feb. 8, 1965. Both
manuscript and reading copy were presented by the president to John Hay and were in turn
presented by his family to the Library of Congress in 1916.
The text of the manuscript is followed by that of the reading copy.
[Manuscript copy]
Fellow Countrymen 2
2 In pencil, possibly in another hand.
At this second appearing to take the oath of the presidential office, there is less occasion for an
extended address than there was at the first. Then a statement, somewhat in detail, of a course to
be pursued, seemed fitting and proper. Now, at the expiration of four years, during which public
Abraham Lincoln papers http://www.loc.gov/resource/mal.4361300
declarations have been constantly called forth on every point and phase of the great contest which
still absorbs the attention, and engrosses the enerergies of the nation, little that is new could be
presented. The progress of our arms, upon which all else chiefly depends, is as well known to the
public as to myself; and it is, I trust, reasonably satisfactory and encouraging to all. With high hope
for the future, no prediction in regard to it is ventured.
On the occasion corresponding to this four years ago, all thoughts were anxiously directed to an
impending civil-war. All dreaded it — all sought to avert it. While the inaugeral address was being
delivered from this place, devoted altogether to saving the Union without war, insurgent agents
were in the city seeking to destroy it without war — seeking to dissole the Union, and divide effects,
by negotiation. Both parties deprecated war; but one of them would make war rather than let the
nation survive; and the other would accept war rather than let it perish. And the war came.
One eighth of the whole population were colored slaves, not distributed generally over the Union,
but localized in the Southern half part of it. These slaves constituted a peculiar and powerful
interest. All knew that this interest was, somehow, the cause of the war. To strengthen, perpetuate,
and extend this interest was the object for which the insurgents would rend the Union, even by war;
while the government claimed no right to do more than to restrict the territorial enlargement of it.
Neither party expected for the war, the magnitude, or the duration, which it has already attained.
Neither anticipated that the cause of the conflict might cease with, or even before, the conflict itself
should cease. Each looked for an easier triumph, and a result less fundamental and astounding.
Both read the same Bible, and pray to the same God; and each invokes His aid against the other. It
may seem strange that any men should dare to ask a just God's assistance in wringing their bread
from the sweat of other men's faces; but let us judge not that we be not judged. The prayers of both
could not be answered; that of neither has been answered fully. The Almighty has His own purposes.
“Woe unto the world because of offences! for it must needs be that offences come; but woe to
that man by whom the offence cometh!” If we shall suppose that American Slavery is one of those
offences which, in the providence of God, must needs come, but which, having continued through
His appointed time, He now wills to remove, and that He gives to both North and South, this terrible
war, as the woe due to those by whom the offence came, shall we discern therein any departure
from those divine attributes which the believers in a Living God always ascribe to Him? Fondly do
we hope — fervently do we pray — that this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away. Yet, if
God wills that it continue, until all the wealth piled by the bond-man’s two hundred and fifty years
of unrequited toil shall be sunk, and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash, shall be paid by
another drawn with the sword, as was said f[our] three thousand years ago, so still it must be said
“the judgments of the Lord, are true and righteous altogether”
Abraham Lincoln papers http://www.loc.gov/resource/mal.4361300
With malice toward none; with charity for all; with firmness in the right, as God gives us to see the
right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in; to bind up the nation's wounds; to care for him
who shall have borne the battle, and for his widow, and his orphan — to achieve and cherish a
lasting peace among ourselves and with the world. to do all which may achieve and cherish a just,
and a lasting peace, among ourselves, and with the world. all nations.3
3 Lincoln revised his text by covering the last two lines (“to achieve . . .the world.”) with a tab,
on which he wrote the revised ending (“to do all . . . the world.”). A further change was made
on the tab itself by striking “the world” and substituting “all nations.”
[Endorsed by Lincoln:]
Original manuscript4
 of second Inaugeral presented to Major John Hay.
4 Lincoln's characterization of this document as the “original manuscript” must be regarded
with some latitude, as the manuscript gives every evidence of being a fair copy, made from
an earlier composition draft. It is undoubtedly the manuscript from which the printed
reading copy was set.
A. Lincoln
April 10, 1865
[Printed Reading Copy]
5
5 Whether Lincoln planned to have his manuscript set up in print to read from, or decided to take
advantage of the advance printing for the press handout, is not known. Comparison with the press
handout shows this reading copy to be an uncorrected galley proof in which the printer had already
made a number of minor changes in spelling, capitalization, and punctuation, many of which Lincoln
accepted. The additional punctuation, particularly the commas added at this late stage, probably
reflects Lincoln's characteristic concern for the most effective pace and delivery.
A list of all changes appears at the end of the text.
FELLOW COUNTRYMEN: At this second appearing to take the oath of the presidential office, there
is less occasion for an extended address than there was at the first. Then, a statement, somewhat
in detail, of a course to be pursued, seemed fitting and proper. Now, at the expiration of four years,
Abraham Lincoln papers http://www.loc.gov/resource/mal.4361300
during which public declarations have been constantly called forth, on every point and phase of the
great contest which still absorbs the attention, and engrosses the energies of the nation, little that
is new could be presented. The progress of our arms, upon which all else chiefly depends, is as well
known to the public as to myself; and it is, I trust, reasonably satisfactory and encouraging to all.
With high hope for the future, no prediction in regard to it is ventured.
On the occasion corresponding to this four years ago, all thoughts were anxiously directed to an
impending civil war. All dreaded it — all sought to avert it. While the inaugural address was being
delivered from this place, devoted altogether to saving the Union without war, insurgent agents
were in the city seeking to destroy it without war — seeking to dissolve the Union, and divide effects,
by negotiation. Both parties deprecated war; but one of them would make war rather than let the
nation survive; and the other would accept war rather than let it perish. And the war came.
One-eighth of the whole population were colored slaves, not distributed generally over the Union,
but localized in the southern half part of it. These slaves constituted a peculiar, and powerful
interest. All knew that this interest was, somehow, the cause of the war. To strengthen, perpetuate
and extend this interest, was the object for which the insurgents would rend the Union, even by war;
while the government claimed no right to do more, than to restrict the territorial enlargement of it.
Neither party expected for the war, the magnitude, or the duration, which it has already attained.
Neither anticipated that the cause of the conflict might cease with, or even before, the conflict itself
should cease. Each looked for an easier triumph, and a result less fundamental and astounding.
Both read the same Bible, and pray to the same God; and each invokes His aid against the other. It
may seem strange that any men should dare to ask a just God's assistance in wringing their bread
from the sweat of other men's faces; but let us judge not, that we be not judged. The prayers of
both could not be answered — that of neither, has been answered fully. The Almighty has His own
purposes. “ Woe unto the world because of offences! for it must needs be that offences come; but
woe to that man by whom the offence cometh.” If we shall suppose that American slavery is one
of those offences which, in the providence of God, must needs come, but which, having continued
through His appointed time, He now wills to remove; and that He gives to both north and south
this terrible war, as the woe due to those by whom the offence came, shall we discern therein any
departure from those divine attributes which the believers in a living God always ascribe to Him?
Fondly do we hope — fervently do we pray — that this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass
away. Yet, if God wills that it continue until all the wealth piled by the bondman's two hundred and
fifty years of unrequited toil shall be sunk, and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash, shall be
paid by another drawn with the sword, as was said three thousand years ago, so still it must be said,
“the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether.”
Abraham Lincoln papers http://www.loc.gov/resource/mal.4361300
With malice toward none; with charity for all; with firmness in the right, as God gives us to see the
right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in; to bind up the nation's wounds; to care for him
who shall have borne the battle, and for his widow, and his orphan — to do all which may achieve
and cherish, a just and a lasting peace, among ourselves, and with the world. all nations.6